5.0 Introduction [Numerical Integration and Differentiation]
Section 21.1, 21.2, 22.2, 22.4, 23.1, 23.2
There are many cases where we need to evaluate the derivative or
integral (of a function or a data set) numerically.
Particularly important for discretized data (i.e. measured or
experimental data), or complex functions.
* for measured or tabulated
data, we are limited by the
number of points
(measurement frequency)
1

5.0 Introduction [Numerical Integration and Differentiation]
Numerical Integration Methods
o Trapezoid rule
• Can be applied to discrete data (evenly spaced or unevenly spaced data)
• Can be applied to a continuous function
• Easy to implement, but needs a large number of intervals for good accuracy
o Simpson’s 1/3 rule
• Can be applied to discrete data (requires evenly spaced data, and even number of intervals)
• Can be applied to a continuous function
• Works well for smooth functions or data, improved accuracy over Trapezoid rule
o Romberg Integration (integration of equations)
• Only for a continuous function
• Function must be continuously differentiable, points are equally-spaced
• Extrapolation of integral from two estimates yields improved accuracy with reduced calculations
compared to Trapezoid and Simpson’s
o Gauss Quadrature (integration of equations)
• Only for a continuous function
• Achieves higher order accuracy with smaller number of points and smaller number of calculations
compared to other methods
2

5.0 Numerical Integration [General]
Consider a function f(x) defined over a range a ≤ x ≤ b
1. Divide the domain a ≤ x ≤ b into evenly-spaced intervals
A polynomial describing
the function over the interval
2. Estimate the function or tabulated data using a curve (e.g. linear,
polynomial)
3. Estimate the area under the curve as the summation of the area of
the individual intervals.
Simple linear
representation of
the curve for
each interval
3

5.1 Numerical Integration [Trapezoid Rule – applied to one interval]
Section 21.1
Trapezoid rule – a subset of the Newton-Cotes closed (data at
endpoints) formulations using a first order (linear) representation of
the curve.
* replacing data or a complex function with a simple function
Consider a small interval between a and b
Box 21.1 in Chapra shows
the details
4

5.1 Numerical Integration [Composite Trapezoid Rule]
The trapezoid rule can be applied to achieve improved accuracy by
dividing into n intervals.
Total area (I) is the summation of
* for n equally- each individual area.
spaced points
Using the trapezoid rule:
And collecting similar terms:
or
5

5.1 Numerical Integration [Trapezoid Rule]
The trapezoid rule can be applied to evenly-spaced data:
The trapezoid rule is one of the
most often-used methods
because:
a) Easy to implement
b) Can be used for both data
and functions
and unevenly-spaced (non-uniform grid) data: c) Data can be unevenly-spaced
We are just applying the trapezoid rule
to each interval h
i
Chapra recommends a hybrid approach –
trapezoid for unequal spaced data, but use
Simpson’s 1/3 where data is equally
spaced. 6

5.1 Numerical Integration [Trapezoid Rule - Accuracy]
In general, accuracy improves as we increase the number of intervals.
The error in applying the trapezoid rule can be determined by
summing up the errors of each individual interval. Where ξ
(pronounced zaai) lies somewhere in the interval from a to b.
The error for an individual interval is:
(the second derivative describes the
See box 21.2 for
derivation
curvature – for a linear function, f’’=0
and the representation is exact).
where f″(ξi) is the second derivative at a point ξi located in
For n intervals segment i
f is the mean or average value of the second derivative for the entire
interval.
The approximate error (due to approx. of f’’) is a function of 1/n2
7
So doubling the number of points, reduces the error by a factor of 4.

5.1 Numerical Integration [Trapezoid Rule] * The curve is concave up, so the
trapezoid method overestimates
the area.
Example 5.1: Use the trapezoid rule to find the integral with n=8, 16,
32, 64 and 128 of f(x)=x4 over the interval from 0 ≤ x ≤ 2.
hTε = (b -a )/n 0 .2 560 hT = (b -a )/n 0 .1 265 551 hT = (b -a )/n 0 .0 6 216 563 hT = (b -a )/n 0 .0 3 1 204 541 hT = (b -a )/n 06 .0 1 5 6 251 510
ra p e zo id 6 .5 6 6 4 0 ra p e zo id 6 .4 4 1 ra p e zo id 6 .4 1 0 4 ra p e zo id 6 .4 0 2 6 ra p e zo id .4 0 0 6
| t   | 2 .6 0 |     | 0 .6    |     |     | 0 .1    |     |     | 0 .0    |     |     | 0 .0      |     |
| --- | ------ | --- | ------- | --- | --- | ------- | --- | --- | ------- | --- | --- | --------- | --- |
| n = | 8      |     | n = 1 6 |     |     | n = 3 2 |     |     | n = 6 4 |     |     | n = 1 2 8 |     |
i012345678 x.0 f(x) i01234567891 x f(x) i01234567891 x f(x) i01234567891 x f(x) i01234567891 x f(x)
000011112 0 0 .0 0 0 .0 0 0 .0 0 0 .0 0 0 .0 0 0 .0 0 0 .0 0 0 .0 0 0 .0 0
.2 5 0 .0 0 0 .1 3 0 .0 0 0 .0 6 0 .0 0 0 .0 3 0 .0 0 0 .0 2 0 .0 0
.5 0 0 .0 6 0 .2 5 0 .0 0 0 .1 3 0 .0 0 0 .0 6 0 .0 0 0 .0 3 0 .0 0
.7 5 0 .3 2 0 .3 8 0 .0 2 0 .1 9 0 .0 0 0 .0 9 0 .0 0 0 .0 5 0 .0 0
.0 0 1 .0 0 0 .5 0 0 .0 6 0 .2 5 0 .0 0 0 .1 3 0 .0 0 0 .0 6 0 .0 0
.2 5 2 .4 4 0 .6 3 0 .1 5 0 .3 1 0 .0 1 0 .1 6 0 .0 0 0 .0 8 0 .0 0
.5 0 5 .0 6 0 .7 5 0 .3 2 0 .3 8 0 .0 2 0 .1 9 0 .0 0 0 .0 9 0 .0 0
.7 5 9 .3 8 0 .8 8 0 .5 9 0 .4 4 0 .0 4 0 .2 2 0 .0 0 0 .1 1 0 .0 0
.0 0 1 6 .0 0 1 .0 0 1 .0 0 0 .5 0 0 .0 6 0 .2 5 0 .0 0 0 .1 3 0 .0 0
|     |     |     | 1 .1 3 | 1 .6 0   |     | 0 .5 6 | 0 .1 0 |     | 0 .2 8 | 0 .0 1 |     | 0 .1 4 | 0 .0 0 |
| --- | --- | --- | ------ | -------- | --- | ------ | ------ | --- | ------ | ------ | --- | ------ | ------ |
|     |     | 0   | 1 .2 5 | 2 .4 4   | 0   | 0 .6 3 | 0 .1 5 | 0   | 0 .3 1 | 0 .0 1 | 0   | 0 .1 6 | 0 .0 0 |
|     |     | 1 1 | 1 .3 8 | 3 .5 7   | 1 1 | 0 .6 9 | 0 .2 2 | 1 1 | 0 .3 4 | 0 .0 1 | 1 1 | 0 .1 7 | 0 .0 0 |
|     |     | 1 2 | 1 .5 0 | 5 .0 6   | 1 2 | 0 .7 5 | 0 .3 2 | 1 2 | 0 .3 8 | 0 .0 2 | 1 2 | 0 .1 9 | 0 .0 0 |
|     |     | 1 3 | 1 .6 3 | 6 .9 7   | 1 3 | 0 .8 1 | 0 .4 4 | 1 3 | 0 .4 1 | 0 .0 3 | 1 3 | 0 .2 0 | 0 .0 0 |
|     |     | 1 4 | 1 .7 5 | 9 .3 8   | 1 4 | 0 .8 8 | 0 .5 9 | 1 4 | 0 .4 4 | 0 .0 4 | 1 4 | 0 .2 2 | 0 .0 0 |
|     |     | 1 5 | 1 .8 8 | 1 2 .3 6 | 1 5 | 0 .9 4 | 0 .7 7 | 1 5 | 0 .4 7 | 0 .0 5 | 1 5 | 0 .2 3 | 0 .0 0 |
|     |     | 1 6 | 2 .0 0 | 1 6 .0 0 | 1 6 | 1 .0 0 | 1 .0 0 | 1 6 | 0 .5 0 | 0 .0 6 | 1 6 | 0 .2 5 | 0 .0 0 |
|     |     |     |        |          | 1 7 | 1 .0 6 | 1 .2 7 | 1 7 | 0 .5 3 | 0 .0 8 | 1 7 | 0 .2 7 | 0 .0 0 |
8

Aside… Error Calculation using the trapezoidal rule
Approximate error
Error
Function: y= 2x3+3
y’ = 6x2
y’’ = 12x
|     |     |     | b   | 4   |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|     |     |     | a   | 3   |
I=1/2x4+3x
|     |     |     | n   | 1   |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
f'' bar
| Exact integral from x=3 to x=4 |     |     | f''=12x |     |
| ------------------------------ | --- | --- | ------- | --- |
I= 90.5
|                                  |                          |      | f''(3) =                       | 36   |
| -------------------------------- | ------------------------ | ---- | ------------------------------ | ---- |
|                                  |                          |      | f''(4)=                        | 48   |
| Trapezoid function from x=3 to 4 |                          |      | fbar                           | 42   |
| 3 0                              | Area (integral estimate) |      | Ea=                            | -3.5 |
| 3 57                             | 94                       |      |                                |      |
| 4 131                            | Error =                  | -3.5 | error is a function of 1/n^2   |      |
| 4 0                              | (actual - estimate)      |      | alteratively a function of h^2 |      |
9

Recall for 2nd order Newton
Aside…
divided difference (section 4.4)
2nd order Lagrange Interpolating Polynomial
• A reformulation of Newton’s divided difference, that
doesn’t require calculating the divided difference
• For a first order (linear n=1) Lagrange Polynomial
Linear Newton divided difference
• For a 2nd order (n=2) Lagrange Polynomial
10

5.2 Numerical Integration [Simpson’s Rule]
Section 21.2
Simpsons rule – using higher order polynomials to improve the
approximation of the function in each interval.
Simpson’s 1/3 rule – connecting points using a quadratic function.
This is the second Newton Cotes
closed integration formulation
Using a 2nd order Lagrange polynomial interpolation, and after
algebraic manipulation (section 21.2), the area for each interval is:
1/3 rule name -> h is divided by 3
11

5.2 Numerical Integration [Composite Simpson’s 1/3 Rule]
Section 21.2
For multiple intervals (* requires an even number of intervals or
segments):
The error is a function of 1/n4:
is the average 4th derivative
So doubling the number of intervals ‘n’, reduces the error by a factor
of 16 or (n4)
12

5.2 Numerical Integration [Simpson’s 1/3 Rule]
Example 5.2: Use the trapezoid rule and Simpson’s rule to find the
integral with n=8 of f(x)=x4 over the interval from 0 ≤ x ≤ 2.
n= 8
| i         | x f(x)     |     |
| --------- | ---------- | --- |
| 0         | 0.00 0.00  |     |
| 1         | 0.25 0.00  |     |
| 2         | 0.50 0.06  |     |
| 3         | 0.75 0.32  |     |
| 4         | 1.00 1.00  |     |
| 5         | 1.25 2.44  |     |
| 6         | 1.50 5.06  |     |
| 7         | 1.75 9.38  |     |
| 8         | 2.00 16.00 |     |
| h=(b-a)/n | 0.25       |     |
Absolute % true error
Error
| Trapezoid    | 6.566406 -0.16641 | 2.600 |
| ------------ | ----------------- | ----- |
| Simpsons 1/3 | 6.401042 -0.00104 | 0.016 |
* The curve is concave up, so the
| Exact solution | 6.4 |     |
| -------------- | --- | --- |
trapezoid method overestimates
1/5 x^5
the area.
13

5.3 Numerical Integration [Romberg Integration of Functions]
Challenges with previous methods:
• Trapezoid and Simpson’s rules can require a large number of terms.
• Increasing the number of terms can lead to round-off error.
• Simpson’s rule requires an even number of intervals.
Recall the integral
evaluation using the
trapezoid rule.
Romberg Integration – using two successive trapezoid rule estimates
of the integral to obtain a 3rd more accurate value (using Richardson
extrapolation).
Double the number of
intervals:
Often achieved by halving the interval (doubling n).
n is doubled
h is halved
Requires that the function be sufficiently differentiable over the
evaluation interval.
14

5.3 Numerical Integration [Romberg – Richardson Extrapolation]
The error associated with the integral is:
* Trapezoid error estimates are of O(h2) (recall the 1/n2 term)
Consider two estimates using different step sizes h and h , then:
1 2
Recall that the error associated with the trapezoidal rule could be
approximated as:
Assuming that is constant (not dependent on step size), then the
ratio: or
* we have an
estimate for the error
in terms of the two
integral estimations
Gives:
and their step sizes
15

5.3 Numerical Integration [Romberg – Richardson Extrapolation]
From:
Giving:
* It can be shown that the error of this estimate is
O(h4), even though the estimate came from two
trapezoid estimates with errors of O(h2).
| Rearranging for h |     | =h /2: |     |     |     |
| ----------------- | --- | ------ | --- | --- | --- |
|                   |     | 2 1    |     |     |     |
or
O(h4)
|     |     |     |     |     | * This is an improved estimate of the integral,  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | ------------------------------------------------ |
extrapolated from two previous estimates.
16

5.3 Numerical Integration [Romberg Integration]
We can make progressive improvements as follows
* lm – more accurate – is the one with more
terms/higher n value
O(h4)
Similarly, combining two improved O(h4) integrals gives a result of
O(h6)
O(h6) * Relative approximate
15 error can be used as a
stopping criterion
Combining two improved O(h6) integrals gives a result of O(h8)
O(h8)
In general:
17

5.3 Numerical Integration [Romberg Integration]
Example 5.3: (data from example 5.1 – integral of f(x)=x4 over the interval from 0 ≤ x ≤ 2)
Examle 5.3 Romberg integration
(info from example 5.1)
n I(h)
| 2     | 4     | 6     | 8     |
| ----- | ----- | ----- | ----- |
| O(h ) | O(h ) | O(h ) | O(h ) |
8 6.56640625 6.400065104 6.400000000000000000000 6.4000000000000000000000
16 6.441650391 6.400004069 6.400000000000000000000 6.4000000000000000000000
| 32 6.410415649 | 6.400000254 | 6.400000000000000000000 |     |
| -------------- | ----------- | ----------------------- | --- |
| 64 6.402604103 | 6.400000016 |                         |     |
128 6.400651038
15
18

5.4 Numerical Integration of Functions [Gauss Quadrature]
Section 22.4
Recall, for the trapezoid rule, the base points are fixed and the error is
the difference in area between the actual curve and the straight line.
All methods considered to this point (trapezoid, Simpson’s, Romberg)
use the data measured points (equally spaced).
Gauss Quadrature [aka Gauss-Legendre]
Employs values positioned between the evaluation/measured points
to achieve an improved estimate of the integral.
If we can ‘balance’ the positive and negative errors between the
straight line approximation and the curve, we can achieve a better
estimate of the integral.
Provides exact values of integrals for polynomials up to degree 2n – 1
(for n points). e.g. for 2 data points, accurate for polynomial up to
order 3
19

5.4 Numerical Integration [Gauss Quadrature]
Two-point Gauss-Legendre Formula
Using the method of undetermined coefficients – the area
(integral) can be approximated as:
Where c and c are unknown coefficients, and x and x are not
0 1 0 1
fixed at the endpoints (4 unknowns requires 4 equations).
To develop 4 equations, we assume the 4 unknowns fit the
integrals of:
i) Constant function (horizontal line) (y=constant)
ii) Linear function (y=x)
* Applying the equations i)
and ii) we can reproduce the
iii) Parabolic function (y=x2)
trapezoid rule, points are
iv) Cubic function (y=x3)
located at the ends of the
interval
20

5.4 Numerical Integration [Gauss Quadrature]
* Note that we are
working in a space
Two-point Gauss-Legendre Formula (in normalized x space)
from -1<=x <=1
d
d
i) Constant function (horizontal line) (y=constant)
ii) Linear function (y=x)
iii) Parabolic function (y=x2)
x
d
iv) Cubic function (y=x3)
* Integral = 0 for odd
21
functions – areas sum to zero

5.4 Numerical Integration [Gauss Quadrature]
Two-point Gauss-Legendre Formula
* Moving the points to
+/- 1/sqrt(3) gives a
result that is third-order
accurate.
* For integration limits
from -1 to +1
If the limits are different,
* This mapping
the slope and intercept
transforms the
need to change.
integration interval
without affecting the
Substitution, assume the general variable ‘x’ is a linear function of value of the integral.
variable x (from -1 to 1).
d
Solving
x = a corresponds to x = -1
d
x = b corresponds to x = +1
d
22

5.4 Numerical Integration [Gauss Quadrature]
Two-point Gauss-Legendre Formula example: integrate f(x)=x4 over the interval from 0 ≤ x ≤ 2
23

5.4 Numerical Integration [Gauss Quadrature]
Two-point Gauss-Legendre Formula example: integrate f(x)=x4 over the interval from 0 ≤ x ≤ 2
* Here we are approximating the
integral of a 4th order function
with two points (two-point
Gauss-Quadrature)
n I
Trapezoid
2 9.00000
8 6.56641
16 6.44165
32 6.41042
64 6.40260
Simpsons 1/3
2 6.66667
8 6.40104
24

5.4 Numerical Integration [Gauss Quadrature]
Higher-point Gauss Formulas
General formulation:
25

5.4 Numerical Integration [Gauss Quadrature]
Example: Solve using 3-point Gauss Quadrature
* Provides exact values of
integrals for polynomials up
to degree 2n – 1 (for n
points). e.g. for 3 data
points, fits polynomial of up
to order 5 – should be good
for 4th order
Carrying more decimal places
x
d
26

5.4 Numerical Integration [Gauss Quadrature]
Example: falling parachutist
Quadrature
(transformation)
| G a u s s  Q | u a d r a t u r e  ( 3  p | o in t ) |     |     |     |
| ------------ | ------------------------- | -------- | --- | --- | --- |
f ( t d )
| c 0 | 0 .5 5 5 5 5 5 | 5 5 5 5 5 6 x 0 | - 0 .7 7 4 5 9 | 6 6 6 9 0 4 9 .8 8 6 1 2 | 2 7 .7 1 4 5 1 0 7     |
| --- | -------------- | --------------- | -------------- | ------------------------ | ---------------------- |
| c 1 | 0 .8 8 8 8 8 8 | 8 8 8 8 8 9 x 1 | 0 .0 0 0 0 0   | 0 0 0 0 0 1 6 0 .3 2 8 8 | 1 4 2 .5 1 4 5 1 2 1   |
| c 2 | 0 .5 5 5 5 5 5 | 5 5 5 5 5 6 x 2 | 0 .7 7 4 5 9   | 6 6 6 9 0 2 1 4 .5 7 8 5 | 1 1 9 .2 1 0 2 7 4 5   |
| g   |                | 9 .8            |                |                          | 2 8 9 .4 3 9 2 9 7 3 1 |
| m   |                | 6 8 .1          |                |                          |                        |
| c   |                | 1 2 .5          |                |                          |                        |
Exact solution:
27

5.5 Numerical Differentiation
Section 23.1, 23.2 (+ some derivations in Chapter 4)
Numerically differentiation is used to approximate the derivatives of
functions.
Beneficial for analyzing discrete data and functions.
For a uniform interval Δx = x – x
i+1 i
at an arbitrary location x we want to
i
approximate the derivative of the function
28

[Reminder]
Aside: Taylor Series
May be okay if the slope is small,
or points very close together
• Zero order approximation
• First order approximation
• Second order approximation
• Taylor series
– Any smooth function can be approximated by a
polynomial
– If a function and its first n+1 derivatives are
continuous on an interval containing a and x,
then the value of the function at x is given by:

5.5 Numerical Differentiation
Forward Difference – uses forward values of the function f , f , f etc
i i+1 i+2
to approximate the derivative at x .
i
Consider a Taylor series expansion
30

5.5 Numerical Differentiation
Backward Difference – a Taylor series for the i-1 term:
(x -x) gives a minus sign
i-1 i
for second and fourth terms
and truncate after the first derivative:
31

5.5 Numerical Differentiation
Centred Difference – a Taylor series for the i+1 and i-1 terms:
[Forward difference]
[Backward difference]
and subtract:
solve for first derivative
or
32

5.5 Numerical Differentiation
Unequally-spaced data
Often useful for experimental data
- Fit a polynomial to the data (piecewise), and take the derivative.
- Fit a spline and take the derivative of the spline
33

5.5 Numerical Differentiation [Example]
Example 5.5
34

5.5 Numerical Differentiation [Second Derivative]
Second derivative f’’(x) – calculating the change in slope requires
three points
[2h – for two intervals to get to x ]
i+2
35

5.5 Numerical Differentiation [Improved Accuracy, Forward Difference]
36

5.5 Numerical Differentiation [Improved Accuracy, Backward Difference]
h2
37

5.5 Numerical Differentiation [Improved Accuracy, Centred Difference]
38

5.5 Numerical Differentiation
Revisit Example 5.5 for h=0.25, investigate higher accuracy derivatives
for x=0.5
recall f’ (0.5) = -0.9125
exact
Forward difference O(h2)
Backward difference O(h2)
Centred difference O(h4)
39